# Table 13-10-0096-01: Health characteristics, annual estimates

The data was generated from the `StatCan` website:

https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/cv.action?pid=1310009601

To modify the data, go to `Customize table`.
Under `Geography`, the following categories were selected:

1. Canada (excluding territories)
2. Newfoundland and Labrador
3. Prince Edward Island
4. Nova Scotia
5. New Brunswick
6. Quebec
7. Ontario
8. Manitoba
9. Saskatchewan
10. Alberta
11. British Columbia

Under `Age group`, the following categories were selected:

1. Total, 12 years and over
2. 12 to 17 years
3. 18 to 34 years
4. 35 to 49 years
5. 50 to 64 years
6. 65 years and over

Under `Sex`, the following categories were selected:

1. Both sexes
2. Males
3. Females

Under `Indicators`, all categories were selected:

1. Perceived health, very good or excellent
2. Perceive health, fair or poor
3. Perceived health, fair or poor
4. Perceived mental health, very good or excellent
5. Perceived mental health, fair or poor
6. Perceived life stress, most days quite a bit or extremely stressful
7. Body mass index, adjusted self-reported, adult (18 years and over), overweight
8. Body mass index, adjusted self-reported, adult (18 years and over), obese
9. Body mass index, self-reported, youth (12 to 17 years old), overweight or obese
10. Arthritis (15 years and over)Diabetes
11. Asthma
12. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD; 35 years and over)
13. High blood pressure
14. Mood disorder
15. Current smoker, daily or occasional
16. Current smoker, daily
17. Heavy drinking
18. Self-reported physical activity, 150 minutes per week, adult (18 years and over)
19. Self-reported physical activity, average 60 minutes per day, youth (12 to 17 years old)
20. Breast milk feeding initiation
21. Exclusive breastfeeding, at least 6 months
22. Fruit and vegetable consumption, 5 times or more per day
23. Sense of belonging to local community, somewhat strong or very strong
24. Life satisfaction, satisfied or very satisfied
25. Has a regular healthcare provider
26. Contact with a medical doctor in the past 12 months
27. Influenza immunization in the past 12 months
28. Cannabis use, past 12 months
29. Cannabis frequency of use in the past months, daily or almost daily

Under `Characteristics`, the following metrics were selected:

1. Number of persons
2. Low 95% confidence interval, number of persons
3. High 95% confidence interval, number of persons
4. Percent
5. Low 95% confidence interval, percent
6. High 95% confidence interval, percent
7. Statistically different from previous reference period
8. Statistically different from the Canada (excluding territories) rate

Under `Reference period`, the range `2015 - 2021` was selected.

To download, two files were selected:

1. `CSV: Download cube metadata information`
2. `CSV: Download selected data (for database loading)`